Note: this is an updated and amended version of an article by the same author that was published under the title: Bitcoin has an energy problem that solar power can't fix.
https://countercurrents.org/2017/12/17/bitcoin-has-an-energy-problem-that-solar-power-cant-fix/

#Solar Power Won't Fix Bitcoin's Energy Problem.

Bitcoin mining - the mechanism of creating Bitcoins and approving transactions on the blockchain - [consumes huge amounts of electricity](http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-10-06/quiggin-bitcoins-are-a-waste-of-energy/6827940) due to the use of a 'Proof of Work' cryptographic algorithm. While clean energy, including mainly hydropower and geothermal is used to mine some Bitcoin, most uses coal, because coal power is both ubiquitous and cheap.

Burning coal produces carbon dioxide, an invisible gas that is important for both feeding plants and regulating our home planet's climate. Given that the energy consumption of the Bitcoin mining network increases in [lockstep with dollar value of the coin](http://seao2.com/bitcarbon), the rise in the price of Bitcoin comes with a corresponding energy and carbon footprint. If it rises, this is problematical, as the abundance of CO2 in the atmosphere causing our planet to overheat.

In 2015, the world's political leaders signed the UN Paris Agreement to limit global warming to 2 degrees Celsius above the pre-industrial baseline. This agreement implies a global carbon budget of [565 billion tons of CO2 by 2050](https://insideclimatenews.org/news/20140213/climate-change-science-carbon-budget-nature-global-warming-2-degrees-bill-mckibben-fossil-fuels-keystone-xl-oil), which is to say that no more that this amount of CO2 can be emitted into the atmosphere. The world is already more than 1o Celsius hotter than it ought to be, and fast approaching the '[dangerous to humanity](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2016/03/01/february_2016_s_shocking_global_warming_temperature_record.html)' threshold. Bitcoin mining - a form of energy consumption that did not exist ten years ago - is adding to the difficulties of the world making the necessary cuts carbon emissions.
 
Some pundits suggest a simple solution to this crypto-carbon problem: power the Bitcoin mining network with solar energy. After-all, solar energy is today producing some of the cheapest electricity in the world. Not only that, sunshine is much more abundant than coal and solar power has no carbon footprint. So the question rises, can solar power make Bitcoin sustainable? The answer is no, and see why, it is necessary to understand the Bitcoin mining process in a capitalist marketplace on a planet with finite resources.

Once upon a time, Bitcoin mining was the thing of libertarian crypto-nerds, and 'math wizzes' who were smart enough to figure out how the confusing cryptocurrency worked. When Bitcoin was worth US$0.01, it was easy to mine Bitcoin on a regular PC computer, but very few people did so. As the popularity of Bitcoin increased, so did the number of people mining it, and the computational effort in the Bitcoin mining network, the hashrate, went up. As the hashrate went up, so did the 'Proof of Work Difficulty' mechanism. This Difficulty measure increased the computational effort needed to mine the Bitcoin. And as a result of that, the amount of energy needed to mine the Bitcoin went up, too. Difficulty is a mechanism that regulates the supply of new Bitcoins to a fixed amount - now around 3,600 per day. As Difficulty increased over time, desktop PC computers were no longer up to the task of mining Bitcoin, so miners resorted to more powerful graphics cards.

Since its launch with the Genesis Block in January 2009, when Bitcoins were virtually valueless, the value has exploded, reaching a height of nearly US$20,000 each in mid-December, 2017. Mining Bitcoins today requires a specialist device called an Application Specific Integrated Circuit, or ASIC for short. The best ASIC Bitcoin mining rig on the market, the Bitmain Antminer S9, retails for about US$7,000 and consumes about 1,300 watts of electrical energy. For context, the average domestic energy demand in American is about 1.2kW.

Since its early days, when math nerds were the only people who cared about Bitcoin, the cryptocurrency has gone full-capitalism. Investments totalling billions of dollars have poured into financial technology companies that interconnect with the Bitcoin blockchain; in rural China where the power is cheap, millions of Yuan have been spent on Bitcoin mining farms; and untold amounts of Krona have been dished out on pristine mining facilities in Iceland, taking advantage of inexpensive hydrothermal power and icy, Arctic air to reduce cooling costs.

As a result of this infusion of capitalism, wealthy and powerful interests now protect Bitcoin, and it won't be possible to just turn Bitcoin off. Furthermore, these powerful interests want the price to keep going up. This suggests that Bitcoin's energy problem is going to endure, and could get much worse.

With this prognosis, it would seem to make sense to build a huge solar farm in a desert, and a monstrous shed the size of Elon Musk's Gigafactory, pack it with Antminers, and then connect the solar power to the mining farm. Is this not a way to solve the energy/carbon problem of Bitcoin? It seems to make sense. With all that venture capital money floating around, there should be no impediment to financing a huge solar powered Bitcoin mining farm in the desert.

Connecting an Antminer S9 to 1.3kW of solar panels in a sunny region of the world, it would allow the mining rig to run for about five hours at full pace. However, in the morning, evening and night, there would be little or no mining taking place as there would be insufficient sunlight to maintain the flow of electrons. A back of envelope calculation suggests that to keep the Antminer running 24 hours a day would require about 8.6kW of PV modules, and batteries enough to store about 24.7kWh. If you could do it for one Antminer, you could do it for a thousand and call it a solar powered bitcoin mining farm. Technically, this is not problematical.

The problem is, however, that Bitcoins Proof of Work/Difficulty mechanism, coupled with capitalism's incessant quest for profit, means that the price of the Bitcoin, and the difficulty in gaining it, risks going up exponentially surge. In this instance, keeping the Bitcoin mining network supplied with clean solar energy would require an exponential increase in the number of solar panels.
 
According to Power Compare, if Bitcoin's growth rate were to continue growing the way it was before the price crashed, and no new power generating capacity was added to the global network, then [Bitcoin mining would have been on course to consume all the world's electricity by February 2020](https://powercompare.co.uk/bitcoin/). That's an alarming statistic, but how does it match the real world?

Given that the price of Bitcoin isn't anchored to anything, there is no real theoretical maximum to how much Bitcoin could be worth. Hypothetically, if each of the Bitcoin's hundred million subunits - called Satoshis - were worth US$0.01 each, then a single Bitcoin would be worth US$1,000,000. Is that possible? Well, there is no shortage of analysts projecting [Bitcoin at US$1,000,000](http://www.smh.com.au/small-business/finance/on-this-trajectory-it-wont-be-long-before-one-bitcoin-is-worth-1-million-a-pop-20171116-gzn9jb.html), some project a much higher price. Furthermore, as mentioned, there is an army of capitalists who want Bitcoin's price to go higher.

At time of writing, Bitcoin was trading at US$7,800, and according to [Digiconomist](https://digiconomist.net/bitcoin-energy-consumption), the Bitcoin mining network is consuming about 0.26% of the world's electricity, and producing about 29 million tonnes of CO2 per annum, an amount equivalent to the nation of Jordan. These numbers are consistent with the Long Future Foundation's Cryptoplanet Analysis assuming the '60-0.06-0.6' rule which states that 60% of the value of Bitcoin is consumed in electricity at a cost of US$0.06 per kWh and with carbon intensity of 0.6kg CO2 per kWh. [Download the spreadsheet here](http://longfuture.org/cryptoplanet/data/Cryptoplanet-calculator.xlsx).

At US$1,000,000, according to the Cryptoplanet Analysis, the energy consumed by the Bitcoin mining network will be around 26% of global electricity, producing over 3.9 billion tonnes (Gigatonnes) of CO2 per annum. At US$5 million (as per [Rick Falkvinge] (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LthnTU7sa50), the Swedish information technology entrepreneur) Bitcoin mining will consume 132% of global electricity supply, producing 19.7 Gigatonnes CO2. For context, humans currently produce about 10 Gigatonnes CO2 per annum. You can start to see the problem now, can't you?

Now, these figures derive from a model that is much less complicated than the real world. So, will Bitcoin ever gobble up 26% of the planet's electricity? Yes? No? Maybe? The point of the model is not the literal interpretation of the outputs, but the essence of the argument. Bitcoin's energy demand could spiral out of control in lock-step with the dollar value of the coin, and all that energy has to come from somewhere.

Despite what Bitcoin's legendary founder Satoshi Nakamoto might have thought, we humans do not live on an orbiting space station powered by fusion reactors. Instead we live inside the biosphere of a living planet, and carbon regulates the temperature. We can't keep powering Bitcoin with coal because meeting the Paris target requires that the global fossil fuel industry is functionally wound-up by 2050. With that said, it is preposterous to think we can manufacture enough solar panels to keep up with Bitcoin's limitless demand for energy.

In 2016, solar power produced [375 billion kilowatt-hours or 1.8%](https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/iea-global-installed-pv-capacity-leaps-to-303-gw#gs.4TlzHGg) of the world's electricity supply. Just imagine how hard it will be to keep the 1.8% figure - let alone rise it, to meet the carbon budget - if Bitcoin swallows 26% of the world's electricity at US$1,000,000. Further, producing solar panels has an energy and environmental cost - there is a lot of glass, aluminium, poly-silicone, copper and energy involved. It takes about [36 months for a solar panel to repay the energy consumed in its construction](https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy04osti/35489.pdf). For context, assuming that Power Compare's projection that Bitcoin consumes all the world's electricity in 26 months were right, this will have happened BEFORE the Bitcoin solar panels have even repaid the energy debt of their production!

There simply isn't enough capacity to create all the solar panels needed to power society AND provide Bitcoin's potentially stellar thirst for electrons. In fact, Bitcoin's power drain could tip us all over the climate cliff, because [global emissions must peak by 2020](http://www.mission2020.global/2020 The Climate Turning Point.pdf) if we are to stay within the carbon budget and avoid hitting 2 degrees above baseline. That's not going to happen if the value of Bitcoin goes back on the rise the way it has.

Another point to make about Bitcoin's burgeoning thirst for electrons is that it is **wholly unnecessary**. There is nothing that Bitcoin does that dozens of other cryptocurrencies that use energy-sipping cryptographic proofs can't do. **Absolutely nothing**. [Blockchain technology NXT](https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/nxt-proof-stake-new-alternative-altcoin-1391226906/), for example, has a negligible energy footprint due to its use of Proof of Stake. There is energy required to run computers and servers in the system, but the power bills will not go exponential if the value of the coin increases.

Bitcoin's carbon potential is scary, but what is scarier still is that there not just one Bitcoin with an energy problem, there are multiple: Bitcoin Classic, Bitcoin Gold and Bitcoin Cash to name a few. In fact, there are hundreds, because Bitcoin has spawned dozens of clones called Alt Coins. For each of the Alt Coins, there is a community of aficionados all doing what they can to get the price (and therefore the electricity/carbon) to soar. Assessments have been made for the carbon emissions of Bitcoin, but as yet, there is no appraisal of the total energy burden on Planet Earth of all the other cryptocurrencies.

A very reasonable fear for rational people who are 'climate woke' is that cryptocurrency based on Proof of Work/ Difficulty is a Frankenstein technology that will wreak havoc on the planet's climate. As if it wasn't hard enough to navigate a transition to zero carbon, now there is Bitcoin and its kind plugging into electricity networks from the [Arctic](http://www.businessinsider.com/photos-iceland-bitcoin-ethereum-mine-genesis-mining-cloud-2016-6?IR=T/#these-photos-are-from-genesis-mining-a-cloud-mining-company-it-lets-customers-mine-using-its-cloud-without-having-to-buy-specialised-hardware-1) to the [tropics](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/09/big-in-venezuela/534177/) and [everywhere in between](https://visual.ly/community/infographic/geography/united-nations-bitcoin).

It is fair to say that the Crypto-community see themselves as innovators and early adopters of new technology, libertarians and anti-authority warriors for the little guy, and not as heartless planet-killers. However, reading the comments in the articles that talk about crypto-carbon, one might think otherwise. The comments routinely refer to climate concerns as FUD, a term that describes inducing 'fear, uncertainty and doubt' to dissuade someone from adopting a particular technology.

Thus, with Wall Street protecting their investments, and the community hoping for the price to rise, it looks like the world has stumbled into a potential cryptocurrency climate catastrophe with no clear exit. It may be the case that Satoshi Nakamoto's ground breaking blockchain technology has killed off what little chance we humans had to transition to an ecologically sustainable [clean energy future](http://grist.org/article/bitcoin-could-cost-us-our-clean-energy-future/).

Perhaps there is a technical solution to this problem. Maybe Bitcoin's algorithm can be adjusted to make it run on Proof of Stake, like the NXT system. There is a precedent, as the [Ethereum blockchain technology](https://www.coindesk.com/ethereums-big-switch-the-new-roadmap-to-proof-of-stake/) is doing just his. If that won't work, maybe it's possible to create a financial mechanism that makes people rich from shorting Bitcoin until it's price crashes to near zero and its energy demand falls. Failing that, it is unclear how to fix Bitcoin's exponential energy problem. Simple as it might seem, solar power is not the answer. 

Guy Lane
Executive Director
The Long Future Foundation
guylane@longfuture.org
www.longfuture.org
29/3/2018
 
 
 